# What is the DOM?

The _document object model_, or DOM, is quite literally a _model_ of your HTML
document and the objects inside it - a representation built by the browser.

The DOM is important because the browser and other programs (like Javascript)
don't interact with your HTML directly - they interact with the DOM.  The
browser needs to understand what your HTML represents in order to display it to
your users.  Javascript needs to be able to find objects on the page and do stuff 
to them.  The HTML file you write doesn't change when it's displayed to users or 
when they interact with it, but the DOM can change.

Conceptually, the DOM looks like a tree.  It's the same kind of hierarchical
organization you've probably seen outlining a paper, or organizing subject
headings.  Here's a drawing of the DOM of the html basics file I've been using
for screencasts.  Well, part of it - I left out some elements so it wouldn't get 
too cluttered:

[HTML basics partial DOM image]

The DOM is the exact same hierarchical structure you see in your developer tools:

[HTML basics dev tools DOM]

(Need a refresher on developer tools? Here you go: https://vimeo.com/84643016 )

This is part of why we use developer tools instead of View Source, by the way. 
View Source shows the HTML as it existed when you loaded the page, but it doesn't
reflect any changes due to scripts since then, so it may not have much in common
with the page you actually see in your browser.  (Another big reason is that
the hierarchical organization of the DOM makes it _much_ easier to find and
examine specific objects on the page.)

Be aware that this is the short version. There is a LOT more information out there
about the DOM.  Most of it may feel too technical right now, which is why I've
written a short version.  However, if you write a lot of Javascript, you'll need to 
have a more nuanced understanding of the DOM, especially because you'll need to 
fix bugs that rest in DOM properties, or in differences between what you think the 
current state of the DOM is and what it actually is.  If you'd like to learn
more, Google will bring you a ton of useful stuff.